Mv articles from AGH wiki (#438)
AdguardTeam/KnowledgeBaseDNS: docs/adguard-home/clients.md

Reviewer: Add a TODO about hosting all screenshots from CDN.

![top clients names](../../static/img/top-clients-names.png)

Runtime clients sources can be disabled via the [`clients.runtime_sources`][sources] object of the configuration file.

[whois]:   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WHOIS
[sources]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome/wiki/Configuration#configuration-file

## Persistent clients {#persistent-clients}

If you want more than just to see the client names, you may want to configure each client manually.  If that's the case, head to the “Settings → Clients settings” page and click the "Add client" button there.

![new client](../../static/img/new-client.png)

### Identifying clients

First of all, you need to decide how you would like to identify the client. There are several options to do this.

1. **IP address.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1`. This is the easiest way to do this, but it may be not good enough if the IP address changes too often.

1. **CIDR range.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1/24`. Allows attributing a whole range of IP addresses (in the example it is `192.168.0.*`) to the same client.

> 1. **MAC address.**  Using MAC as a client identifier is **only** possible when AdGuard Home works as the network's [DHCP server](DHCP).

Reviewer 2: Broken link.  Remove the link temporarily and add a `<!-- TODO -->` about putting it back once the DHCP article is moved.

[wild]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wildcard_certificate

### Settings

Each client can be configured individually.  You may choose what to block, what settings should be used, or you could even configure a completely different set of upstream DNS servers to be used for this client.

![client settings](../../static/img/client-settings.png)

## Per-client blocking {#per-client-blocking}

There are two ways of how you can configure blocking on the per-client basis. Both of them are based on using AdGuard blocklist rules syntax for the rules you're adding to "Custom filtering rules".

### `client` rules

The first one is using the `client` modifier.  This way you can limit the rule to a particular client or clients.

Examples:

- `@@||*^$client=127.0.0.1`: Unblock everything for localhost.

- `||example.org^$client='Frank\'s laptop'`: Block `example.org` for the client named `Frank's laptop` only.  Note that quote (`'`) in the name must be escaped.

- `||example.org^$client=192.168.0.0/24`: Block `example.org` for all clients with the IP addresses in the range `192.168.0.0-192.168.0.255`.

> You can find more `client` examples in the [article](Hosts-Blocklists#client) about the filtering rules syntax.

Reviewer 2: Here and on line 111, broken links.

These should lead to [this page](https://adguard-dns.io/kb/general/dns-filtering-syntax/) with a relative link.

---
title: Clients
sidebar_position: 7
---

AdGuard Home allows flexible configuration for devices that are connected to it. On a basic level, you may just want to be able to distinguish them and see friendly names instead of naked IP addresses. Additionally, AdGuard Home allows you applying different rules depending on the client.

## Friendly names {#friendly-names}

AdGuard Home tries to automatically collect some basic information about the device that's connecting to it.

Here is what it tries to do in order to figure out the client's hostname:

> 1. inspects the hosts files (for example, `/etc/hosts`) and uses hostnames found there to identify clients;

Reviewer: ~~A note needed (referencing the `configuration.md`) that the appropriate client source should be enabled.~~

Oh, I can see it below.

1. makes reverse DNS lookups;

1. inspects the system ARP table;

1. for public IP addresses it also makes [WHOIS][whois] queries in order to find out the client's location and the company the IP belongs to;

1. for IP addresses leased by AdGuard Home's DHCP server it obtains the hostname from leases.

If the only thing you need is to see friendly names in AdGuard Home stats then editing the hosts file may be the easiest way to achieve this. Please note that you may need to restart AdGuard Home to apply the changes.

> ![top clients names](../../static/img/top-clients-names.png)

Reviewer: AFAIK, we upload the images to Google Drive to use them in the KnowledgeBaseDNS.  @ainar-g, is it critical?

Reviewer 2: Please inquire with the content team w.r.t. static files policy.

Runtime clients sources can be disabled via the [`clients.runtime_sources`][sources] object of the configuration file.

[whois]:   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WHOIS

> [sources]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome/wiki/Configuration#configuration-file

Reviewer: The `configuration.md` is already in proress.  I think we need TODOs on each stale reference to update them.

## Persistent clients {#persistent-clients}

If you want more than just to see the client names, you may want to configure each client manually.  If that's the case, head to the “Settings → Clients settings” page and click the "Add client" button there.

![new client](../../static/img/new-client.png)

### Identifying clients

<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): When the DHCP server article is moved, add a link to this article.-->

First of all, you need to decide how you would like to identify the client. There are several options to do this.

1. **IP address.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1`. This is the easiest way to do this, but it may be not good enough if the IP address changes too often.

1. **CIDR range.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1/24`. Allows attributing a whole range of IP addresses (in the example it is `192.168.0.*`) to the same client.

1. **MAC address.**  Using MAC as a client identifier is **only** possible when AdGuard Home works as the network's DHCP server.

1. **ClientIDs.**  Special identifiers that can be used with some encrypted DNS protocols. [See below](#clientid).

> #### ClientID

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this term should be monospaced.  @ainar-g, what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Nah.  The fact that it's CamelCase is enough to make it distinct, in my opinion.

Author: @EugeneOne1, so, what is the final decision?

Reviewer: @makazantsev, leave it as is.

ClientIDs are identifiers that can be used with the following DNS protocols: DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-TLS, and DNS-over-QUIC.  To use this identifier, clients should perform queries using a special domain name or URL.  For example:

- AdGuard Home has the domain name `example.org`.

- In AdGuard Home you add a persistent client with the ClientID `my-client`.

- On the client device you can now configure:

    :::note

    The URL ClientID has higher priority than the server-name ClientID.  If you use both, only the URL ClientID is used.

    :::

    - **DNS-over-HTTPS:** `https://my-client.example.org/dns-query`. (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

    - **DNS-over-QUIC:** `quic://my-client.example.org` (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

    - **DNS-over-TLS:** `tls://my-client.example.org` (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

Note that the TLS certificate must be valid **both** for `*.example.org` **and** `example.org`.

[wild]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wildcard_certificate

> ### Settings

Reviewer: I guess each header needs an anchor.

Each client can be configured individually.  You may choose what to block, what settings should be used, or you could even configure a completely different set of upstream DNS servers to be used for this client.

![client settings](../../static/img/client-settings.png)

## Per-client blocking {#per-client-blocking}

There are two ways of how you can configure blocking on the per-client basis. Both of them are based on using AdGuard blocklist rules syntax for the rules you're adding to "Custom filtering rules".

### `client` rules

The first one is using the `client` modifier.  This way you can limit the rule to a particular client or clients.

> Examples:

Reviewer: `s/Examples:/**Example:**/g`.

<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): Update the reference, when the configuration is moved to the Knowledge Base.-->
[sources]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome/wiki/Configuration#configuration-file

## Persistent clients {#persistent-clients}

If you want more than just to see the client names, you may want to configure each client manually.  If that's the case, head to the “Settings → Clients settings” page and click the "Add client" button there.

![new client](../../static/img/new-client.png)

### Identifying clients {#identifying-clients}

<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): When the DHCP server article is moved, add a link to this article.-->

First of all, you need to decide how you would like to identify the client. There are several options to do this.

1. **IP address.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1`. This is the easiest way to do this, but it may be not good enough if the IP address changes too often.

1. **CIDR range.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1/24`. Allows attributing a whole range of IP addresses (in the example it is `192.168.0.*`) to the same client.

1. **MAC address.**  Using MAC as a client identifier is **only** possible when AdGuard Home works as the network's DHCP server.

> 1. **ClientIDs.**  Special identifiers that can be used with some encrypted DNS protocols. [See below](#clientid).

Reviewer: Wrong link.  Please, take a look at the [preview deployment](https://pull-request-438.kb-dns.pages.dev) and check all references.

#### ClientID {#client-id}

ClientIDs are identifiers that can be used with the following DNS protocols: DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-TLS, and DNS-over-QUIC.  To use this identifier, clients should perform queries using a special domain name or URL.  For example:

- AdGuard Home has the domain name `example.org`.

- In AdGuard Home you add a persistent client with the ClientID `my-client`.

- On the client device you can now configure:

    :::note

    The URL ClientID has higher priority than the server-name ClientID.  If you use both, only the URL ClientID is used.

    :::

>     - **DNS-over-HTTPS:** `https://my-client.example.org/dns-query`. (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

Reviewer: Perhaps, we should mention the URL-path ClientID example.

---
title: Clients
sidebar_position: 7
---

> AdGuard Home allows flexible configuration for devices that are connected to it. On a basic level, you may just want to be able to distinguish them and see friendly names instead of naked IP addresses. Additionally, AdGuard Home allows you applying different rules depending on the client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AdGuard Home offers flexible configuration options for connected devices. At the most basic level, you may simply want to distinguish between them and see friendly names instead of IP addresses. AdGuard Home also allows you to apply different rules depending on the client.
```

## Friendly names {#friendly-names}

> AdGuard Home tries to automatically collect some basic information about the device that's connecting to it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AdGuard Home tries to automatically collect some basic information about the device that’s connecting to it.
```

> Here is what it tries to do in order to figure out the client's hostname:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here is what it tries to do in order to figure out the client’s hostname:
```

> 1. inspects the hosts files (for example, `/etc/hosts`) and uses hostnames found there to identify clients;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Inspects the hosts files (for example, `/etc/hosts`) and uses hostnames found there to identify clients.
```

> 1. makes reverse DNS lookups;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Makes reverse DNS lookups.
```

> 1. inspects the system ARP table;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Inspects the system ARP table.
```

> 1. for public IP addresses it also makes [WHOIS][whois] queries in order to find out the client's location and the company the IP belongs to;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. For public IP addresses, it also makes [WHOIS][whois] queries in order to find out the client’s location and the company the IP belongs to.
```

> 1. for IP addresses leased by AdGuard Home's DHCP server it obtains the hostname from leases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. For IP addresses leased by AdGuard Home’s DHCP server, it obtains the hostname from leases.
```

> If the only thing you need is to see friendly names in AdGuard Home stats then editing the hosts file may be the easiest way to achieve this. Please note that you may need to restart AdGuard Home to apply the changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you only need to see friendly names in the AdGuard Home stats, editing the hosts file is probably the easiest way to achieve this. Please note that you may need to restart AdGuard Home to apply the changes.
```

<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): Host all screenshots from CDN.-->
![top clients names](../../static/img/top-clients-names.png)

Runtime clients sources can be disabled via the [`clients.runtime_sources`][sources] object of the configuration file.

[whois]:   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WHOIS
<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): Update the reference, when the configuration is moved to the Knowledge Base.-->
[sources]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome/wiki/Configuration#configuration-file

## Persistent clients {#persistent-clients}

> If you want more than just to see the client names, you may want to configure each client manually.  If that's the case, head to the “Settings → Clients settings” page and click the "Add client" button there.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want more than just the client names, you will need to configure each client manually. To do so, go to *Settings* → *Client settings* and click *Add client*.
```

![new client](../../static/img/new-client.png)

### Identifying clients {#identifying-clients}

<!-- TODO(m.kazantsev): When the DHCP server article is moved, add a link to this article.-->

First of all, you need to decide how you would like to identify the client. There are several options to do this.

> 1. **IP address.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1`. This is the easiest way to do this, but it may be not good enough if the IP address changes too often.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **IP address.** For instance, `192.168.0.1`. This is the easiest way to do this, but it may be not good enough if the IP address changes too often.
```

> 1. **CIDR range.**  For instance, `192.168.0.1/24`. Allows attributing a whole range of IP addresses (in the example it is `192.168.0.*`) to the same client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **CIDR range.** For instance, `192.168.0.1/24`. It allows attributing a whole range of IP addresses (in this example, `192.168.0.*`) to the same client.
```

> 1. **MAC address.**  Using MAC as a client identifier is **only** possible when AdGuard Home works as the network's DHCP server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **MAC address.** Using MAC as a client identifier is **only** possible when AdGuard Home works as the network’s DHCP server.
```

> 1. **ClientIDs.**  Special identifiers that can be used with some encrypted DNS protocols. [See below](#client-id).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **ClientIDs.** Special identifiers that can be used with some encrypted DNS protocols. [See below](#client-id).
```

#### ClientID {#client-id}

> ClientIDs are identifiers that can be used with the following DNS protocols: DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-TLS, and DNS-over-QUIC.  To use this identifier, clients should perform queries using a special domain name or URL.  For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ClientIDs are identifiers that can be used with the following DNS protocols: DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-TLS, and DNS-over-QUIC. To use this identifier, clients should perform queries using a special domain name or URL. For example:
```

- AdGuard Home has the domain name `example.org`.

> - In AdGuard Home you add a persistent client with the ClientID `my-client`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In AdGuard Home, add a persistent client with the ClientID `my-client`.
```

> - On the client device you can now configure:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- On the client device, you can now configure the following:
```

    :::note

>     The URL ClientID has higher priority than the server-name ClientID.  If you use both, only the URL ClientID is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The URL ClientID has higher priority than the server-name ClientID. If you use both, only the URL ClientID is used.
```

    :::

    - **DNS-over-HTTPS:**

        - URL ClientID: `https://example.org/dns-query/my-client`.

>         - Server-name ClientID: `https://my-client.example.org/dns-query`. (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Server-name ClientID: `https://my-client.example.org/dns-query` (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).
```

    - **DNS-over-QUIC:** `quic://my-client.example.org` (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

    - **DNS-over-TLS:** `tls://my-client.example.org` (requires a [wildcard certificate][wild]).

Note that the TLS certificate must be valid **both** for `*.example.org` **and** `example.org`.

[wild]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wildcard_certificate

### Settings {#settings}

> Each client can be configured individually.  You may choose what to block, what settings should be used, or you could even configure a completely different set of upstream DNS servers to be used for this client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each client can be configured individually. You may choose what to block, what settings should be used, or you could even configure a completely different set of upstream DNS servers to be used for this client.
```

![client settings](../../static/img/client-settings.png)

## Per-client blocking {#per-client-blocking}

> There are two ways of how you can configure blocking on the per-client basis. Both of them are based on using AdGuard blocklist rules syntax for the rules you're adding to "Custom filtering rules".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two ways of how you can configure blocking on the per-client basis. Both of them are based on using AdGuard blocklist rules syntax for the rules you’re adding to *Custom filtering rules*.
```

### `client` rules {#client-rules}

> The first one is using the `client` modifier.  This way you can limit the rule to a particular client or clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first method uses the `client` modifier. It allows you to limit the rule to a specific client or clients.
```

Example:

- `@@||*^$client=127.0.0.1`: Unblock everything for localhost.

> - `||example.org^$client='Frank\'s laptop'`: Block `example.org` for the client named `Frank's laptop` only.  Note that quote (`'`) in the name must be escaped.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `||example.org^$client='Frank\'s laptop'`: Block `example.org` for the client named `Frank's laptop` only. Note that quote (`'`) in the name must be escaped.
```

- `||example.org^$client=192.168.0.0/24`: Block `example.org` for all clients with the IP addresses in the range `192.168.0.0-192.168.0.255`.

> You can find more `client` examples in the [article][filtering-syntax-client] about the filtering rules syntax.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find more `client` examples in the [article about the filtering rules syntax][filtering-syntax-client].
```

### `ctag` rules {#ctag-rules}

> The second way is to use another modifier called `ctag`. When you create a new client, tags can be assigned to it.  These tags can then be used in the filtering rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second way is to use another modifier called `ctag`. When you create a new client, tags can be assigned to it. These tags can then be used in the filtering rules.
```

Example:

- `||example.org^$ctag=device_pc|device_phone`: Block `example.org` for clients tagged as `device_pc` or `device_phone`.

- `||example.org^$ctag=~device_phone`: Block `example.org` for all clients except those tagged as `device_phone`.

> You can find more `ctag` examples as well as the full list of tags in the [article][filtering-syntax-ctag] about the filtering rules syntax.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find more `ctag` examples as well as the full list of tags in the [article about the filtering rules syntax][filtering-syntax-ctag].
```

- `||example.org^$ctag=~device_phone`: Block `example.org` for all clients except those tagged as `device_phone`.

You can find more `ctag` examples as well as the full list of tags in the [article][filtering-syntax] about the filtering rules syntax.

> [filtering-syntax]: ../general/dns-filtering-syntax.md

Reviewer 2: Please add two *different* links that use the section IDs, like they used to.

- `||example.org^$ctag=~device_phone`: Block `example.org` for all clients except those tagged as `device_phone`.

You can find more `ctag` examples as well as the full list of tags in the [article][filtering-syntax-ctag] about the filtering rules syntax.

[filtering-syntax-client]: ../general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#client-client-modifier

> [filtering-syntax-ctag]: ../general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#ctag-ctag-modifier

Reviewer 2: ```diff
-[filtering-syntax-client]: ../general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#client-client-modifier
-[filtering-syntax-ctag]: ../general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#ctag-ctag-modifier
+[filtering-syntax-client]: /general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#client-modifier
+[filtering-syntax-ctag]: /general/dns-filtering-syntax.md#ctag-modifier
```

And please check your work with `pnpm build` and `pnpm start`.
